WIP: proxyless gRPC blogpost (#10168)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2021/proxyless-grpc/index.md

Istio 1.11 adds experimental support for basic service discovery, some `VirtualService` based traffic policy, and
mutual TLS.

## Supported Features

The current implementation of the xDS APIs within gRPC is limited in some areas compared to Envoy. The following
features should work, although this is not an exhaustive list and other features may have partial functionality:

* Basic service discovery. Your gRPC service can reach other pods and virtual machines registered in the mesh.
* [`DestinationRule`](/docs/reference/config/networking/destination-rule/):
  * Subsets: Your gRPC service can split traffic based on label selectors to different groups of instances. 
  * The only Istio `loadBalancer` currently supported is `ROUND_ROBIN`, `consistentHash` will be added in the future.
  * `tls` settings are restricted to `DISABLE` or `ISTIO_MUTUAL`. Other modes will be treated as `DISABLE`.
* [`VirtualService`](/docs/reference/config/networking/virtual-service/):
  * Header match and URI match in the format `/ServiceName/RPCName`
  * Override destination host and subset.
  * Weighted traffic shifting.

>   * // TODO does timeout work (I think we must set MaxStreamDuration for this to work – I don't think we do today)

Author: confirmed this suspicion

>   * // TODO do retries work

Author: They're adding some retry policy support, but partially implemented in C/Java, not in Go.

>   * // TODO do faults work

Author: reading the code, it should, but i couldn't get it to work

>   * // TODO does mirror work

Author: couldn't get it to work

communication with the control-plane. First, the agent generates a [bootstrap file](https://github.com/grpc/proposal/blob/master/A27-xds-global-load-balancing.md#xdsclient-and-bootstrap-file).
This tells the `gRPC` library how to connect to `istiod`, where it can find certificates for data plane communication,
and what metadata to send to the control plane. Next, the agent acts as an `xDS` proxy, connecting and authenticating
with `istiod` on the application's behalf. Finally, the agent fetches and rotates certificates used in data plane
traffic. 

## Changes to application code

> Here we cover gRPC’s XDS support in Go. See <insert link> for information on other languages. 

To enable the xDS features in gRPC, there are a handful of required changes your application must make. Your gRPC
version should be at least `1.39.0`. 

### In the client

The following side-effect import will register the xDS resolvers and balancers within gRPC. It should be added in your
`main` package or in the same package calling `grpc.Dial`.   

{{< text go >}}
import _ "google.golang.org/grpc/xds"
{{< /text >}}

> When creating a gRPC connection the URL must use the `xds:///` scheme. For now, the fully-qualified domain name must be

Author: I added examples where everything works. I don't think we should call it a restriction.

---
title: "gRPC Proxyless Service Mesh"
description: Introduction to Istio support for gRPC's proxyless service mesh features.
publishdate: 2021-09-02
attribution: "Steven Landow (Google)"
---

Istio dynamically configures its Envoy sidecar proxies using a set of discovery APIs, collectively known as the
[xDS APIs](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/operations/dynamic_configuration).
These APIs aim to become a [universal data-plane API](https://blog.envoyproxy.io/the-universal-data-plane-api-d15cec7a?gi=64aa2eea0283).

> The gRPC project has started to implement the xDS APIs, which means you can manage gRPC workloads without having to deploy

Reviewer: gRPC already has significant support for xDS APIs. Please replace "has started to implement" with "already has significant support for" and link to https://github.com/grpc/proposal/search?q=xds

Author: sure thing!

an Envoy sidecar along with them. You can learn more about the integration in a [KubeCon EU 2021 talk from Megan Yahya](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cGJXkZ7jiDk).

Istio 1.11 adds experimental support for adding gRPC services directly to the mesh. We support basic service
discovery, some VirtualService based traffic policy, and mutual TLS.

## Supported Features

The current implementation of the xDS APIs within gRPC is limited in some areas compared to Envoy. The following
features should work, although this is not an exhaustive list and other features may have partial functionality:

* Basic service discovery. Your gRPC service can reach other pods and virtual machines registered in the mesh.
* [`DestinationRule`](/docs/reference/config/networking/destination-rule/):
    * Subsets: Your gRPC service can split traffic based on label selectors to different groups of instances.

>     * The only Istio `loadBalancer` currently supported is `ROUND_ROBIN`, `consistentHash` will be added in the future.

Reviewer: consistentHash was just released in gRPC in case that is what is blocking the support.

Author: `consistentHash` is mostly blocked on our side

Author: Updated to reflect gRPC supports but istio doesn't

    * Override destination host and subset.
    * Weighted traffic shifting.
* [`PeerAuthentication`](/docs/reference/config/security/peer_authentication/):
    * Only `DISABLE` and `STRICT` are supported. Other modes will be treated as `DSIABLE`.
    * Support for auto-mTLS may exist in a future release.

Other features including faults, retries, timeouts, mirroring and rewrite rules may be supported in a future release.
Some of these features are awaiting implementation in gRPC, and others require work in Istio to support. The status
of xDS features in gRPC can be found [here](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/grpc_xds_features.md). The
status of Istio's support will exist in future official docs.

{{< warning >}}
This is feature is [experimental](/docs/releases/feature-stages/). Standard Istio features will become supported
over time along with improvements to the overall design.
{{< /warning >}}

## Architecture Overview

{{< image width="80%" link="./architecture.svg" caption="Diagram of how gRPC services communicate with the istiod" >}}

Although this doesn't use a proxy for data plane communication, it still requires an agent for initialization and

> communication with the control-plane. First, the agent generates a [bootstrap file](https://github.com/grpc/proposal/blob/master/A27-xds-global-load-balancing.md#xdsclient-and-bootstrap-file).

Reviewer 2: Sorry, it is not clear to me how the agent generates this file. Could you expand it a bit?

Author: Hopefully I made it clearer – it generates this on startup using various Istio configurations to set the node metadata and discovery address.

* Basic service discovery. Your gRPC service can reach other pods and virtual machines registered in the mesh.
* [`DestinationRule`](/docs/reference/config/networking/destination-rule/):
    * Subsets: Your gRPC service can split traffic based on label selectors to different groups of instances.
    * The only Istio `loadBalancer` currently supported is `ROUND_ROBIN`, `consistentHash` will be added in the future.
    * `tls` settings are restricted to `DISABLE` or `ISTIO_MUTUAL`. Other modes will be treated as `DISABLE`.
* [`VirtualService`](/docs/reference/config/networking/virtual-service/):
    * Header match and URI match in the format `/ServiceName/RPCName`
    * Override destination host and subset.
    * Weighted traffic shifting.
* [`PeerAuthentication`](/docs/reference/config/security/peer_authentication/):
    * Only `DISABLE` and `STRICT` are supported. Other modes will be treated as `DSIABLE`.
    * Support for auto-mTLS may exist in a future release.

Other features including faults, retries, timeouts, mirroring and rewrite rules may be supported in a future release.

> Some of these features are awaiting implementation in gRPC, and others work in Istio to support. The status of xDS

Reviewer 3: and others **require** work in Istio

features in gRPC can be found [here](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/grpc_xds_features.md). The status of
Istio's support will exist in future official docs.

{{< warning >}}
This is feature is [experimental](/docs/releases/feature-stages/). Standard Istio features will

> come supported here over time along with improvements to the overall design.

Reviewer 3: become supported over time

{{< /tip >}}

To enable the xDS features in gRPC, there are a handful of required changes your application must make. Your gRPC version should be at least `1.39.0`.

### In the client

The following side-effect import will register the xDS resolvers and balancers within gRPC. It should be added in your
`main` package or in the same package calling `grpc.Dial`.

{{< text go >}}
import _ "google.golang.org/grpc/xds"
{{< /text >}}

When creating a gRPC connection the URL must use the `xds:///` scheme.

{{< text go >}}
conn, err := grpc.DialContext(ctx, "xds:///foo.ns.svc.cluster.local:7070")
{{< /text >}}

Additionally, for (m)TLS support, a special `TransportCredentials` option has to be passed to `DialContext`.
The `FallbackCreds` allow us to succeed when istiod doesn’t send security config.

{{< text go >}}
import "google.golang.org/grpc/credentials/xds"

...

creds, err := xds.NewClientCredentials(xds.ClientOptions{
FallbackCreds: insecure.NewCredentials()
})
// handle err
conn, err := grpc.DialContext(
ctx,
"xds:///foo.ns.svc.cluster.local:7070",
grpc.WithTransportCredentials(creds),
)
{{< /text >}}

### On the server

> To support server-side configurations, such as mTLS, there are a couple of modifications that must be made here as well.

Reviewer 3: ~~here as well~~

Handling connection for 17171
[0] grpcecho.Echo(&{xds:///echo.echo-grpc.svc.cluster.local:7070 map[] 0  5s false })
[0 body] x-request-id=0
[0 body] Host=echo.echo-grpc.svc.cluster.local:7070
[0 body] content-type=application/grpc
[0 body] user-agent=grpc-go/1.39.1
[0 body] StatusCode=200
[0 body] ServiceVersion=v1
[0 body] ServicePort=17070
[0 body] Cluster=
[0 body] IP=10.68.1.18
[0 body] IstioVersion=
[0 body] Echo=
[0 body] Hostname=echo-v1-7cf5b76586-z5p8l
{{< /text >}}

## Limitations

The initial release comes with several limitations that may be fixed in a future version:

* Auto-mTLS isn't supported, and permissive mode isn't supported. Instead we require explicit mTLS configuration with
  `STRICT` on the server and `ISTIO_MUTUAL` on the client. Envoy can be used during the migration to `STRICT`.
* `grpc.Serve(listener)` or `grpc.Dial("xds:///...")` called before the bootstrap is written or xDS proxy is ready can
  cause a failure. `holdApplicationUntilProxyStarts` can be used to work around this, or the application can be more
  robust to these failures.

> * If the xDS-enabled gRPC server uses mTLS then you will need to make sure your health checks can work around this

Reviewer 3: Missing period at end of sentence

  Either a separate port should be used, or your health-checking client needs a way to get the proper client
  certificates.
* The implementation of xDS in gRPC does not match Envoys. Certain behaviors may be different, and some features may
  be missing. The [`gRFCs`](https://github.com/grpc/proposal) may provide more detail. Make sure to test that any Istio
  configuration actually applies on your proxyless gRPC apps.

## Performance

> ## Experiment Setup

Reviewer 3: `###` ?

* Using Fortio, a Go-based load testing app
    * Slightly modified, to support gRPC’s XDS features (PR)
* Resources:
    * GKE 1.20 cluster with 3 `e2-standard-16` nodes (16 CPUs + 64 GB memory each)
    * Fortio client and server apps: 1.5 vCPU, 1000 MiB memory
    * Sidecar (istio-agent and possibly Envoy proxy): 1 vCPU, 512 MiB memory
* Workload types tested:
    * Baseline: regular gRPC with no Envoy proxy or Proxyless xDS in use
    * Envoy: standard istio-agent + Envoy proxy sidecar
    * Proxyless: gRPC using the xDS gRPC server implementation and `xds:///` resolver on the client
    * mTLS enabled/disabled via `PeerAuthentication` and `DestinationRule`

## Results

### Latency

{{< image width="80%" link="./latencies_p50.svg" caption="p50 latency comparison chart" >}}
{{< image width="80%" link="./latencies_p99.svg" caption="p99 latency comparison chart" >}}

> There is a marginal increase in latency when using the proxyless gRPC resolvers. Compared to Envoy however, this is a

Reviewer 3: ~~however~~

---
title: "gRPC Proxyless Service Mesh"
description: Introduction to Istio support for gRPC's proxyless service mesh features.
publishdate: 2021-09-02
attribution: "Steven Landow (Google)"
---

> ## Background
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

These APIs aim to become a [universal data-plane API](https://blog.envoyproxy.io/the-universal-data-plane-api-d15cec7a?gi=64aa2eea0283).

> The gRPC project has significant support for the xDS APIs, which means you can manage gRPC workloads

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The gRPC project has [significant support](https://github.com/grpc/proposal/search?q=xds) for the xDS APIs, which means you can manage gRPC workloads
```

Reviewer 4: Oh, sorry, I now see you already have that link and should probably revert this commit @stevenctl

Reviewer 4: Otherwise post LGTM

> The gRPC project has [significant support](https://github.com/grpc/proposal/search?q=xds) for the xDS APIs, which means you can manage gRPC workloads

Author: ```suggestion
The gRPC project has significant support for the xDS APIs, which means you can manage gRPC workloads
```

These APIs aim to become a [universal data-plane API](https://blog.envoyproxy.io/the-universal-data-plane-api-d15cec7a?gi=64aa2eea0283).
The gRPC project has started to implement the xDS APIs, which means you can manage gRPC workloads without having to deploy

> an Envoy sidecar along with them. You can learn more about the integration in a [KubeCon EU 20201 talk from Megan Yahya](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cGJXkZ7jiDk).

Reviewer 4: 2021

(You probably need to add `Megan` or `Yahya` to the dictionary too)

[0 body] StatusCode=200
[0 body] ServiceVersion=v1
[0 body] ServicePort=17070
[0 body] Cluster=
[0 body] IP=10.68.1.18
[0 body] IstioVersion=
[0 body] Echo=
[0 body] Hostname=echo-v1-7cf5b76586-z5p8l
{{< /text >}}

## Limitations

The initial release comes with several limitations that may be fixed in a future version:

* Auto-mTLS isn't supported, and permissive mode isn't supported. Instead we require explicit mTLS configuration with
  `STRICT` on the server and `ISTIO_MUTUAL` on the client. Envoy can be used during the migration to `STRICT`.
* `grpc.Serve(listener)` or `grpc.Dial("xds:///...")` called before the bootstrap is written or xDS proxy is ready can
  cause a failure. `holdApplicationUntilProxyStarts` can be used to work around this, or the application can be more
  robust to these failures.
* If the xDS-enabled gRPC server uses mTLS then you will need to make sure your health checks can work around this.
  Either a separate port should be used, or your health-checking client needs a way to get the proper client
  certificates.
* The implementation of xDS in gRPC does not match Envoys. Certain behaviors may be different, and some features may

>   be missing. The [`gRFCs`](https://github.com/grpc/proposal) may provide more detail. Make sure to test that any Istio

Reviewer 5: Drive by comment: https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/grpc_xds_features.md may be a bit more useful (in addition to/instead of the gRFC link)

Reviewer 5: Oh, I see that is linked to above. Seemed it would sorta be useful here, but I question whether it really needs to be linked to again.  I guess nevermind.

Author: ```suggestion
  be missing. The  feature status for gRPC is listed [here](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/grpc_xds_features.md ). Make sure to test that any Istio
```

Author: How is this?

Reviewer 5: That would be fine. I'd probably word it more like before to avoid "here":

> The \[feature status for gRPC](link) provides more detail.

But that's editorial.

Author: ```suggestion
  be missing. The [feature status for gRPC](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/grpc_xds_features.md) provides more detail. Make sure to test that any Istio
```
